---
output: pdf_document
---
README.md 
========================================================
README for the *Getting and Cleaning Data* class project for the Johns Hopkins Data Science specialization on Coursera. 

Repo Contents: 
* README.md
  * This file, describes the procedures used in run_analysis.R script to transformed the raw data into a tidy dataset.
* run_analysis.R  
  * R script. Transforms the raw data into a tidy data data set output to a 'tidy.txt' file.  
* CodeBook.md  
  * Code book for the tidy dataset generated by run_analysis.R. Explains the data organization and variable definitions. 

### Required R Packages and Running Instructions
The following package is required to run the script.   
* dplyr    
The 'UCI HAR Dataset' folder should be in the same directory as run_analysis.R which should be the working directoty. Run the script by opening it in R Studio and clicking 'Source'.

### The run_analysis.R Script Operation Overview
This script summarizes the *Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset* which was originally made avaiable here: http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones. The original data represents information collected from the accelerometers of a smartphone. A full description is available at the site linked above.
The original data was divided into "traning" and "test" sets. The run_analysis.R script combines both these datasets and produces a tidy dataset *tidy.txt* as described in the CodeBook.md file. In summary, the script implements these tasks:

- Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
- Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. 
- Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
- Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names. 
- Creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject and stores it in a 'tidy.txt' test file.

### The run_analysis.R Script Operation Details  
After unziping the raw dataset to the working directory, a 'UCI HAR Dataset' folder is created. This folder contains the training and tests data sets alsong with files identifying sibjects and activities. The following steps are implemented in the script:

1. 	Training set is Imported to a data frame 'df_train'
2. 	Test Set is Imported to a data frame 'df_test'
In steps 1, and 2. above, activity numbers are replaced with its associated activity string according to the activity_labels.txt file. "Subject" and "Activity" columns are added by importing the associated files in the train and test drectories.

3.  A training/test column is added to allow us to identify the provenance of each data row.
4.	The test set and training set data frames are merged into a 'df_combined' data frame.
5.  Using the features.txt information, the script names the column variables in the combined dataframe.
6.  Uses the dplyr package to summarize the results:
	Selects only the columns with mean and std (standard deviation)
	Groups by Subject and Activity 
	Summarizes each group by calculating the mean for each of the variables
7. Finally, the resulting tidy set is written into a tidy.txt file. The script uses the write.table() with default settings.
   The user can read the data set back into R with: read.table("tidy.txt", header = TRUE)

Note: The project statement is ambiguous as to whether "mean" can be any part of the variable name.
In this script, I decided to use only names with 'std()' and 'mean()' so it returns the same number of elements for each (33). 
An alternate 'select' statement is proviced if the user wants *any* variable with 'mean' or 'std' in the name

## End


